# Http2 (h2 for the cool kids)
"...apart from better sanitation and medicine and education and irrigation and public health and roads and a freshwater system and baths and public order... what has http2 done for us?"

## Introduction
Aim of h2 is to address some shortcomings, which are more due to the underlying tcp protocol than http/1.x. Tcp provides reliable connection; to achieve that, it utilizes a flow control strategy where messages at first are exchanged in smaller bits gradually raising the transfer rate. This makes it costly to build up a connection. Http/1.1 introduced pipelining which meant that multiple requests could be made on a single tcp connection. Although this technique increases performance, Head-Of-Line blocking remains an issue; it essentially means that the connection operates as a queue, the order of responses must match the order of request. If a request takes long to respond to, all subsequent requests on the same connection are blocked. 

H2, while keeping the existing semantics of http, brings a dramatic increase in performance partly by allowing multiple requests-reponses in parallel over a single shared connection. Some other bits of the new protocol are its binary nature (as opposed to Http/1.x being textual), header compression and push.

## Comparison of Http/1.x & h2 connections
### Typical Http/1.x request-respons
Request

        GET /index.html HTTP 1.0
        User-Agent: mozila
        Accept: text/html

Response

        HTTP/1.0 200 OK
        Date: Fri, 31 Dec 1999 23:59:59 GMT
        Content-Type: text/html
        Content-Length: 1354
        
        <html>
            <body>
                <h1>Hello, World!</h1>
            </body>
        </html>

### H2 connection
Instead of a textual representation h2 is binary. It operates with the same vocabulary, http method acting as the verb, headers, resources. An important aspect of h2 is that it has to operate on the same infrastructure that supports Http/1.x. 

An option is to use h2 over plaintext connection. For this an 'upgrade' request is sent by the client, if the server is able to handle h2, it responds with the status code 101. Any other response indicates that the connection upgrade is impossible. This mode of operation is mostly a theoretical option as most h2 server libraries choose not to support it.

A better option is to establish the connection over TLS. Instead of the extra UPGRADE message, the process of upgrading the connection is made part of the TLS handshake via the protocol extension Application Layer Protocol Negotiation (ALPN). TLS (colloquially used synonymously with SSL) authenticates clients and verifies integrity of servers. It uses asymmetric encryption as part of the handshake to exchange keys for symmetric encryption. On the one hand establishing the connection adds some overhead; on the other hand symmetric encryption of subsequent messages do not add significant extra complexity. An advantage of the ALPN mechanism is that it is not tied to h2, which means it can be used for other protocols as well in the future.

## Frames
Basic unit of h2 connections are **frames**. They are binary in content, preserving the semantics of Http/1.x: headers are sent in header frames, body is sent in data frames. In total there are 10 different types of frames:

- DATA
- HEADERS
- PRIORITY
- RST_STREAM
- SETTINGS
- PUSH_PROMISE
- PING
- GOAWAY
- WINDOW_UPDATE
- CONTINUATION

Some of these frames are not relevant from a client's point of view, as they are abstracted away even by the low level libraries. Some remain theoretical only as the more widespread libraries are yet to support them. 

### Header Frames
Headers may be sent in a single frame, or multiple frames. In the latter case subsequent ones are sent in continuation frames. Flags may indicate the end of headers, or end of stream. Regular header fields are the garden variety key value pairs. They must be preceeded by the - rather self explanatory - *pseudo header fields*, which are prefixed by a colon:

- `:method`
- `:scheme`
- `:authority`
- `:path`
- `:status`

Header fields are case insensitive, but they are required to be converted to lowercase before encoding.

### Data Frames
Data frames carry the request and response bodies. They are only present if the chosen method requires them. For example a regular GET request does not have an associated body, therefore it lacks a data frame. After the last header frame is sent, the stream is closed in the request direction.

### Some Other Frames
- Ping frame is used to test the connection.
- Goaway frames signal a serious error; they are used to gracefully shut down a connection.
- Settings frame, which carries the connection settings, should be handled by the chosen h2 library.

## Header Compression (HPACK)
Header compression further improves performance. Instead of repeatedly sending actual header names and values, they are looked up by indices from a table whose state has to be maintined throughout the connection's lifespan. Compression is driven by Huffmann encoding; usual headers are maintained in a static table, connection specific headers are cached in an initially empty dynamic table. The size of the latter is set in th setting frame's `SETTINGS_HEADER_TABLE_SIZE` field. The two constitute the *Index Address Space*.

With an appropriate h2 client header compression should be transparent to the library's client.

## Streams
Multiple requests and responses share a single connection. This is achieved by having multiple parallel, bidirectional *streams*, each of which is fully consumed by a single request/response. Requests and responses consist of a set of frames exchanged between client and server. Each of these frames share the same id, which identifies the stream they belong to. Streams bear odd id-s, when initiated from client to server, otherwise it's even. Id of 0 is used for connection control messages. Stream id-s are single-use, and issued in a growing pattern. When an id is discarded, all unused ones, that are lower in number are thrown away as well. "Long-lived connections can result in an endpoint exhausting the available range of stream identifiers. A client that is unable to establish a new stream identifier can establish a new connection for new streams. A server that is unable to establish a new stream identifier can send a GOAWAY frame so that the client is forced to open a new connection for new streams."

The maximum number of concurrent streams is set in SETTINGS frame's `SETTINGS_MAX_CONCURRENT_STREAMS` field.

Streams are stateful. Initially they are **idle**; from a client's perspective they transition into an **open** state on sending Headers frames. End of request is indicated by sending an *END_STREAM* flag. This transitions the stream into a *half closed* state, meaning that it is in a receive only mode. Streams advance into their final closed state once they receive *END_STREAM* from the server.

In case of a GET request the end stream flag is set on a header frame, which indicates that no data frame is sent (ie.: there is no request body). For a POST request, header frames are succeeded by data frames. For push related states refer to the complete [states digram](https://http2.github.io/http2-spec/#StreamStates).
            
                                     +--------+
                             send PP |        | recv PP
                            ,--------|  idle  |--------.
                           /         |        |         \
                          v          +--------+          v
                   +----------+          |           +----------+
                   |          |          | send H /  |          |
            ,------| reserved |          | recv H    | reserved |------.
            |      | (local)  |          |           | (remote) |      |
            |      +----------+          v           +----------+      |
            |          |             +--------+             |          |
            |          |     recv ES |        | send ES     |          |
            |   send H |     ,-------|  open  |-------.     | recv H   |
            |          |    /        |        |        \    |          |
            |          v   v         +--------+         v   v          |
            |      +----------+          |           +----------+      |
            |      |   half   |          |           |   half   |      |
            |      |  closed  |          | send R /  |  closed  |      |
            |      | (remote) |          | recv R    | (local)  |      |
            |      +----------+          |           +----------+      |
            |           |                |                 |           |
            |           | send ES /      |       recv ES / |           |
            |           | send R /       v        send R / |           |
            |           | recv R     +--------+   recv R   |           |
            | send R /  '----------->|        |<-----------'  send R / |
            | recv R                 | closed |               recv R   |
            '----------------------->|        |<----------------------'
                                     +--------+
        
               send:   endpoint sends this frame
               recv:   endpoint receives this frame
        
               H:  HEADERS frame (with implied CONTINUATIONs)
               PP: PUSH_PROMISE frame (with implied CONTINUATIONs)
               ES: END_STREAM flag
               R:  RST_STREAM frame

## H2 Libraries
### Servers with Http/2 support:
- Apache Http 2.4.17+
- Jetty 9.3+
- Tomcat 9

### Client Side Libraries
- Netty
- Jetty
- OkHttp

### Alpn
Since h2 protocol negotioation has been shoehorned into the ssl handshake, jdk7 & jdk8 requires alpn-boot.jar to be incuded on the bootstrap classpath via the `-Xbootclasspath/p:`; `/p` prepends the argument to the default bootstrap classpath. Alpn-boot.jar version has to [match](http://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/current/alpn-chapter.html#alpn-versions) the jdk version. Java 9 is planned to have alpn support which will make the bootclasspath song and dance unnecessary. Without the ALPN component connection over TLS will invariably fail. This is true regardless of the choice of client library.

For tests configure Failsafe plugin with `<argLine>-Xbootclasspath/p:${settings.localRepository}/org/mortbay/jetty/alpn/alpn-boot/${alpn-boot-version}/alpn-boot-${alpn-boot-version}.jar</argLine>`.

Standard Tomcat plugin shares jvm with the host Maven process. To launch the application via Maven with the -Xbootclasspath option, it has to be added to Maven's startup options. Alternatively the Tomcat plugin fork [t7mp](http://t7mp.github.io/maven-t7-plugin/) can be used which supports launching tomcat in a forked jvm. Sadly no startup arguments are available, but if the scripts `setenv.sh` or `setenv.bat` exist, they are invoked at startup. Adding the Xbootclasspath argument to `CATALINA_OPTS` has the same effect.

### High Level Client
High Level clients provide an interface identical to that of Http/1.x. On the one hand this is advantageous, because existing codebases might only require configuration changes to operate over h2 connections. On the other hand this hides the multiplexed nature of the connection, which has the potential to boost throughput.

#### OkHttp

        OkHttpClient client = new OkHttpClient();
        Request.Builder builder = new Request.Builder();
        Request request = builder.url("https://http2.golang.org").build();
        Response response = client.newCall(request).execute();
        ... response.body()
        ... response.headers()


#### High Level Client Over Http2

        HTTP2Client lowLevelClient = new HTTP2Client();
        lowLevelClient.start();
        HttpClient client = new HttpClient(new HttpClientTransportOverHTTP2(lowLevelClient), null);
        client.start();
        ContentResponse response = client.GET(URL);

### Low Level Client

        @Value("classpath:certificate.p12")
        private Resource certificate;
        private FuturePromise<Session> sessionPromise = new FuturePromise<>();
        private Session.Listener loggingSessionListener = new LoggingSessionListener();
        private Stream.Listener loggingStreamListener = new Stream.Listener.Adapter(){
            @Override
            public void onHeaders(Stream stream, HeadersFrame frame) {
                LOGGER.info("### onHeaders(stream[#{}]: {}, frame: {})", stream.getId(), stream, frame);
                if (frame.getMetaData().isResponse()) {
                    MetaData.Response response = (MetaData.Response) frame.getMetaData();
                    LOGGER.info("#### Response status: {}, {}", response.getStatus());
                } 
                for(HttpField field : frame.getMetaData().getFields()) {
                    LOGGER.info("#### {} : {}", field.getName(), field.getValue());
                }
            }
            
            @Override
            public void onData(Stream stream, DataFrame frame, Callback callback) {
                byte[] bytes = new byte[frame.getData().remaining()];
                frame.getData().get(bytes);
                String response = new String(bytes, java.nio.charset.StandardCharsets.UTF_8);
                LOGGER.info("### onData - stream[#{} - {}]: {}", stream.getId(), stream, response);
                callback.succeeded();
            }
        };
        
        ...
        
        InputStream certificateStream = certificate.getInputStream();
        KeyStore keyStore = KeyStore.getInstance("PKCS12");
        keyStore.load(certificateStream, PASSWORD.toCharArray());
        
        SslContextFactory sslContextFactory = new SslContextFactory();
        sslContextFactory.setKeyStore(keyStore);
        sslContextFactory.setKeyStorePassword(PASSWORD);
        
        HTTP2Client client = new HTTP2Client();
        client.addBean(sslContextFactory);
        client.start();
        
        client.connect(sslContextFactory, new InetSocketAddress(HOST, PORT), loggingSessionListener, sessionPromise);
        
        Session session = sessionPromise.get(CONNECTION_TIMEOUT, TimeUnit.SECONDS);
        
        HttpFields requestFields = new HttpFields();
        requestFields.put(HEADER_FIELD, HEADER_VALUE);
        MetaData.Request request = new MetaData.Request(
            POST,
            new HttpURI(SCHEME, HOST, PORT, PATH + token),
            HttpVersion.HTTP_2,
            requestFields);
        HeadersFrame headersFrame = new HeadersFrame(request, null, false);
        
        FuturePromise<Stream> streamPromise = new FuturePromise<>();
        session.newStream(headersFrame, streamPromise, loggingStreamListener);
        Stream stream = streamPromise.get();
        
        DataFrame dataFrame = new DataFrame(stream.getId(), REQUEST_DATA, true);
        stream.data(dataFrame, Callback.NOOP);

        ...
        
        // receive response asynchronously in stream listener's onHeaders() & onData()
        
        client.stop()

### Dependencies
- `org.eclipse.jetty.http2:http2-client`
- `org.eclipse.jetty:jetty-http`
- `org.eclipse.jetty:jetty-io`
- `org.eclipse.jetty:jetty-util`
- `org.mortbay.jetty.alpn:alpn-boot`

## Sources

- https://gist.github.com/judepereira/84f22fdf67ed6dd4d7d3
- http://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/current/http-client.html
- [Java World](http://www.javaworld.com/article/2916548/java-web-development/http-2-for-java-developers.html)
- [Jetty Http/2 getting started](http://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/current/http2.html)
- [oracle blog post on jetty+http2+alpn](https://blogs.oracle.com/brewing-tests/entry/http_2_with_jetty_server)
- [ALPN](http://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/current/alpn-chapter.html#alpn-starting)
- [Pluralsight http 2 fundamentals](https://app.pluralsight.com/library/courses/http2-fundamentals/table-of-contents)
